---
layout: docs
date: 2022-09-01
title: Syllabus
subtitle: 'CS 0441-2231: Discrete Structures for Computer Science'
notes: Adapted from Canvas; See most up-to-date version on Canvas
---
[Return to Course Home](../)
{: .mb-0}
**Please see Canvas for the most up-to-date version of the syllabus**
{: .text-center}

#### Instructor
+ Don Bonidie
    + 6141 Sennott Square
    + [bonidie@pitt.edu](bonidie@pitt.edu)
    + 412-624-8433

#### Teaching Assistant
+ Shinwoo Kim
    + [shinwookim@pitt.edu](shinwookim@pitt.edu)
    + [{{ '' | absolute_url }}]({{ '' | absolute_url }})

#### Course Web Page
+ Canvas
+ {{ 'CS0441-2231' | absolute_url }} (*Recitation*)

#### Textbook
Kenneth H. Rosen. Discrete Mathematics and Its Applications, 8th Edition, McGraw Hill

#### Grading Policy
+ Exams: (70%)
    + Midterm 35%
    + Final 35%
    + **Final and Mid-Term are subject to a 5% swing**
+ Homework assignments: 30%

#### Weekly Homework Assignments
+ Assigned in class and posted on the course web page
+ Due one week later at the beginning of the lecture or recitation
+ No extension policy - be on time!

#### Collaboration policy
+ You may discuss the material covered in the course with your fellow students in order to understand it better
+ However, homework assignments should be worked on and written up individually

#### Cheating policy
*You cheat you flunk!*

#### Tentative Topics
+ Logic and proofs
+ Sets
+ Functions
+ Integers and modular arithmetic
+ Sequences and summations
+ Counting
+ Probability
+ Relations
+ Graphs

#### Academic Integrity
> Students in this course will be expected to comply with the University of Pittsburgh’s Policy on Academic Integrity. Any student suspected of violating this obligation for any reason during the semester will be required to participate in the procedural process, initiated at the instructor level, as outlined in the University Guidelines on Academic Integrity. This may include, but is not limited to, the confiscation of the examination of any individual suspected of violating University Policy. Furthermore, no student may bring any unauthorized materials to an exam, including dictionaries and programmable calculators.

> To learn more about Academic Integrity, visit the Academic Integrity Guide for an overview of the topic. For hands- on practice, complete the Understanding and Avoiding Plagiarism tutorial.

#### Disability Services
> If you have a disability for which you are or may be requesting an accommodation, you are encouraged to contact both your instructor and Disability Resources and Services. (DRS), 140 William Pitt Union, (412) 648-7890, drsrecep@pitt.edu, (412) 228-5347 for P3 ASL users, as early as possible in the term. DRS will verify your disability and determine reasonable accommodations for this course.

#### Statement on Diversity & Inclusion
> The University of Pittsburgh does not tolerate any form of discrimination, harassment, or retaliation based on disability, race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, genetic information, marital status, familial status, sex, age, sexual orientation, veteran status or gender identity or other factors as stated in the University’s Title IX policy. The University is committed to taking prompt action to end a hostile environment that interferes with the University’s mission. For more information about policies, procedures, and practices, visit the Civil Rights & Title IX Compliance web page.
