---
title: 1.1 Propositional Logic
layout: post
category: CS0441
---

## Propositions

A **proposition** is a declarative sentence that is _either_ true or false.

For example, the following statements are all valid propositions.

- The Moon is made of green cheese.
- Trenton is the capital of New Jersey.
- Toronto is the capital of Canada.
- $1 + 0 = 1$
- $0 + 0 = 2$

Note that whether the sentences are true or not does not matter in determining if a statement is a proposition. However, statements that are not true nor false are not valid proposition:

1. Sit down!
2. What time is it?
3. $x + 1 = 2$
4. $x + y = z$

Note that in (3) and (4), the the truth value of the statements vary depending on what $x,y,z$ are. In statement (3), the statement is true if $x=1$, but false otherwise. Since the statement is not explicitly true or false, we do not consider it to be a proposition.

In constructing our own propositions, we often use the **propositional variables**, $p,q,r,s,...$ to represent our propositions. In the special case that the proposition we are representing is _always_ true, we denote it using $\textbf{T}$ and $\textbf{F}$ when is it _always_ false.

## Connectives

We can also use **logical connectives** to combine multiple propositions.

### Negation (Logical NOT)

The **negation** of a proposition $p$ is denoted by $\neg p$ and has the following truth table:

| $p$ | $\neg p$ |
|---|----|
|T|F|
|F|T|

For example, If $p$ denotes _"the earth is round"_, then $\neg p$ denotes _"It is not the case that the earth is round"_, or more simply _"The earth is not round"_.

### Conjunction (Logical AND)

The **conjunction** of propositions $p$ and $q$ is denoted by $p\land q$ and has this truth table:

| $p$ | $q$ | $p \land q$|
|---|----|--|
|T|T|T|
|T|F|F|
|F|T|F|
|F|F|F|

In other words, $p \land q$ is true only when both $p$ and $q$ are true.

For example, if $p$ denotes _"I am at home."_ and $q$ denotes _"It is raining"_, then $p \land q$ denotes _"I am at home and it is raining."_

### Disjunction

The **disjunction** of propositions $p$ and $q$ is denoted by $p \lor q$ and has this truth table:

| $p$ | $q$ | $p \lor q$|
|---|----|--|
|T|T|T|
|T|F|T|
|F|T|T|
|F|F|F|

In other words, $p\lor q$ is false only when both $p$ and $q$ are false.

For example, If $p$ denotes _"I am at home."_ and $q$ denotes _"It is raining."_ then $p \lor q$ denotes _"I am at home or it is raining."_

#### Aside: The connective 'OR' in English

In English _'or'_ has two distinct meanings. It could be referring to the "**inclusive or**" or the "**exclusive or**".

For example, when we say "_students who have taken CS0445 or MATH0230 may take this class_", we assume that the students need to have taken one of the prerequisites, but may have taken both. This "inclusive or" is what we mean when we say disjunction. That is, for $p \lor q$ to be true, either one or both $p$ and $q$ must be true.

However, now consider the statement, "_Soup or salad comes with this entrée_". We would not expect to be able to get both soup _and salad_. This is the meaning of "exclusive or" (XOR) which we denote with $p\oplus q$. For $p\oplus q$ to be true, either $p$ or $q$ must be true, but not both:

| $p$ | $q$ | $p \oplus q$|
|---|----|--|
|T|T|F|
|T|F|T|
|F|T|T|
|F|F|F|

### Implication

If $p$ and $q$ are both propositions, then $p \implies q$ is a **conditional statement** or **implication** which is read as “_if p, then q_” and has this truth table:

| $p$ | $q$ | $p \implies q$|
|---|----|--|
|T|T|T|
|T|F|F|
|F|T|T|
|F|F|T|

For example, If $p$ denotes "_I am at home_" and $q$ denotes "_It is raining_" then $p\implies q$ denotes "**\*If** I am at home **then** it is raining\*."

In this case, we call $p$ the **hypothesis (antecedent or premise)** and $q$ the **conclusion (consequence)**. Notice that $p \implies q$ is only false when the hypothesis is true, but the conclusion is false. More specifically, if the hypothesis is false, the implication will always be true.

Furthermore, for $p \implies q$ to hold, there does not need to be any connection between the antecedent or the consequent. The “meaning” of $p\implies q$ depends only on the truth values of
$p$ and $q$. That is, the following implications are all valid, even if they do not make 'sense' in english:

- "_If the moon is made of green cheese, then I have more money than Bill Gates_."
- "_If the moon is made of green cheese then I’m on welfare_."
- "_If 1 + 1 = 3, then your grandma wears combat boots_."

There are a variety of methods to represent implications in english:

- if $p$, then $q$
- $p$ implies $q$
- if $p$, $q$
- $p$ only if $q$
- $q$ unless $\neg p$
- $q$ when $p$
- $q$ if 4p$
- $q$ whenever $p$
- $p$ is sufficient for $q$
- $q$ follows from $p$
- $q$ is necessary for $p$
- a necessary condition for $p$ is $q$
- a sufficient condition for $q$ is $p$

#### Contrapositive, Inverse, and Converse

From $p \implies q$, we can form new conditional statements:

1. $q \implies p$ is called the **converse**
2. $\neg q \implies \neg p$ is called the **contrapositive** and has the same truth value as $p \implies q$
3. $\neg p \implies \neg q$ is called the **inverse**

For example, if we are given the statement "_It raining is a sufficient condition for my not going to
town_":
The inverse would be: "_If it is not raining, then I will go to town_"
The converse would be: "_If I do not go to town, then it is raining_"
The contrapositive would be: "_If I go to town, then it is not raining_"

### Biconditional

If $p$ and $q$ are propositions, then we can form the **biconditional proposition** $p\iff q$, read as “$p$ **if and only if** $q$.” The biconditional $p \iff q$, denotes the proposition with this truth table:

| $p$ | $q$ | $p \Leftrightarrow q$|
|---|----|--|
|T|T|T|
|T|F|F|
|F|T|F|
|F|F|T|

In other words,$p \Leftrightarrow p$ is true only when the truth values of $p$ and $q$ match. Also, we may sometimes abbreviate '_if and only if_' to **iff**.

For example, if $p$ denotes "_I am at home_" and $q$ denotes "_It is raining_" then $p \Leftrightarrow q$ denotes "_I am at home if and only if it is raining_".

Some other ways to express a biconditional is:

- $p$ is **necessary and sufficient** for $q$
- **if** $p$ **then** $q$ , and **conversely**
- $p$ **iff** $q$

### Precedence of Logical Operators

The precedence of logical operators is as follows:

1. Negation ($\neg p$)
2. Conjunction ($p \land q$), Disjunction ($p \lor q$)
3. Implication ($p \implies q$), Biconditional ($p \iff q$)
   We should use parenthesis to clarify when the meaning is ambiguous.

## Truth Tables

To examine the truth value of our compound propositions, we can construct a truth table.

1. We will need a row for every possible combinations of values for the atomic propositions. We will soon show that we need $2^n$ rows where $n$ represents the number of atomic propositions (since each proposition can be either true or false, we have two cases per proposition).
2. We will usually place our desired compound proposition on the far right; We will usually place our atomic propositions on the left. We also need a column for the truth value of each expression that occurs in the compound proposition as it is built up.
   For example we can build a truth table for $p \lor q \implies \neg r$ as such:

| $p$ | $q$ | $r$ | $\neg r$ | $p \lor q$ | $p \lor q \implies \neg r$ |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|:--------:|:----------:|:--------------------------:|
| T   | T   | T   | F| T  | F  |
| T   | T   | F   | T| T  | T  |
| T   | F   | T   | F| T  | F  |
| T   | F   | F   | T| T  | T  |
| F   | T   | T   | F| T  | F  |
| F   | T   | F   | T| T  | T  |
| F   | F   | T   | F| F  | T  |
| F   | F   | F   | T| F  | T  |

### Equivalent Propositions

From truth tables, we can determine whether two (or more) propositions are **equivalent** (always have identical truth values).

For example a conditional proposition is equivalent to its contrapositive.

| $p$ | $q$ | $\neg p$ | $\neg q$ | $p \implies q$ | $\neg q \implies \neg p$ |
|----|----|----|----|----|--------------------|
| T | T | F | F | T | T |
| T | F | F | T | F | F |
| F | T | T | F | T | T |
| F | F | T | T | T | T |

Clearly, $p \implies q$ and $\neg q \implies \neg p$ have the same truth values, thus they are equivalent. To show that two (or more) propositions are not equivalent, we simply need to show that there is a case where the same combination of atomic propositions lead to differing truth values.
